>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28th:
THE SUSPECTED GUNMAN, IN CUSTODY
FOR YESTERDAY'S SHOOTING IN
COLORADO, IS IDENTIFIED; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, SAN
FRANCISCO'S BOLD PLAN TO
ELIMINATE ALL NEW INFECTIONS OF
H.I.V., THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES
AIDS.
>> WE KNOW HOW TO PREVENT THIS
DISEASE, WE KNOW HOW TO TREAT
THIS DISEASE.
SO WHY WOULD WE NOT WANT TO
PREVENT EVERY SINGLE INFECTION
AND PREVENT EVERY SINGLE DEATH?
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
POLICE IN COLORADO SPRINGS,
COLORADO, HAVE IDENTIFIED THE
SUSPECT IN YESTERDAY'S SHOOTING
AT A PLANNED PARENTHOOD CLINIC.
AUTHORITIES SAY 57-YEAR-OLD
ROBERT LEWIS DEAR SHOT 12
PEOPLE, KILLING THREE OF THEM,
BEFORE A FIVE-HOUR STANDOFF
ENDED WITH HIS SURRENDER TO
POLICE.
DEAR IS SCHEDULED TO MAKE HIS
FIRST COURT APPEARANCE MONDAY.
THE COLORADO SPRINGS POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAS YET TO DETAIL
WHAT KIND OF GUN WAS USED,
WHETHER THE GUNMAN HAD ANY
CONNECTION TO THE WOMEN'S HEALTH
FACILITY, OR HIS MOTIVE.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD SAID TODAY,
DESPITE THE ATTACK, IT WILL
"NEVER BACK AWAY" FROM PROVIDING
ITS REPRODUCTIVE AND SEXUAL
HEALTH SERVICES, WHICH INCLUDE
PROVIDING ABORTIONS.
AMONG THE FATALITIES WAS
44-YEAR-OLD UNIVERSITY OF
COLORADO POLICE OFFICER GARRETT
SWASEY, A MARRIED FATHER OF TWO
WHO WAS AMONG THE FIRST OFFICERS
ON THE SCENE.
FIVE OTHER OFFICERS WERE ALSO
SHOT AND ARE EXPECTED TO RECOVER
AS ARE FOUR OTHER PEOPLE WHO
WERE WOUNDED.
PARIS REMAINS ON A HIGH SECURITY
ALERT AS 194 DELEGATIONS BEGIN
ARRIVING FOR THE TWO-WEEK UNITED
NATIONS CLIMATE CHANGE
CONFERENCE THAT BEGINS MONDAY.
SINCE TERRORIST ATTACKS KILLED
130 PEOPLE TWO WEEKS AGO,
FRANCE'S INTERIOR MINISTER SAYS
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DEEMED A
THOUSAND PEOPLE SECURITY RISKS
AND BARRED THEM FROM ENTERING
THE COUNTRY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS AMONG 150
HEADS OF STATE SCHEDULED TO
ATTEND THE CONFERENCE.
AROUND THE WORLD TODAY, THERE
WERE MARCHES URGING LEADERS TO
AGREE ON CUTS IN EMISSIONS OF
HEAT-TRAPPING GASES THAT ARE
CAUSING A RISE IN GLOBAL
TEMPERATURES.
DEMONSTRATORS CALLED ON THEIR
COUNTRIES ATTENDING THE
CONFERENCE TO RATIFY PLANS TO
REDUCE THEIR CONSUMPTION OF
FOSSIL FUELS.
A MARCH THAT HAD BEEN PLANNED
TODAY IN PARIS WAS CANCELLED
DUE TO THE SECURITY ALERT, BUT
FRENCH PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE MET ENVIRONMENTALISTS
TODAY AT THE ELYSEE PALACE.
ALSO ON MONDAY, AMERICA'S
RICHEST MAN, BILL GATES, IS
EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE THE LAUNCH
OF A NEW MULTIBILLION-DOLLAR
FUND TO RESEARCH CLEAN ENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES, ACCORDING TO
"CLIMATE WIRE."
GATES, THE CO-FOUNDER OF
MICROSOFT, IN IS PARIS FOR THE
CLIMATE CONFERENCE.
GATES PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED HE
WOULD DONATE $1 BILLION OVER THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS FOR RENEWABLE
ENERGY RESEARCH.
FORBES ESTIMATES HIS WEALTH AT
$76 BILLION.
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES ARRIVING
IN EUROPE ARE FINDING ANOTHER
TEMPORARY OBSTACLE IN THE
BALKANS.
TODAY, MACEDONIA BEGAN PUTTING
UP A TEN-FOOT-HIGH METAL FENCE
ALONG ITS SOUTHERN BORDER WITH
GREECE, TO STEM THE FLOW AND
PREVENT ILLEGAL BORDER
CROSSINGS.
SOME MIGRANTS THREW ROCKS AT
MACEDONIAN POLICE, WHO RESPONDED
WITH TEAR GAS AND STUN GRENADES.
MACEDONIA JOINS HUNGARY IN
PUTTING UP A BORDER FENCE TO
RESTRICT THE MOVEMENT OF
MIGRANTS WHO ARE MOSTLY FROM
SYRIA, IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION ESTIMATES 900,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES HAVE
ARRIVED IN EUROPE THIS YEAR.
THE WIRE SERVICE A.F.P. SAYS
AN ISLAMIC EXTREMIST GROUP WITH
TIES TO AL QAEDA HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK
TODAY ON UNITED NATIONS
PEACEKEEPERS IN THE WEST AFRICAN
NATION OF MALI.
THE U.N. SAYS MORTARS WERE FIRED
INTO THE BASE AT DAWN, KILLING
TWO SOLDIERS AND A CONTRACTOR.
THE ATTACK OCCURRED EIGHT DAYS
AFTER ISLAMIST MILITANTS SHOT
AND KILLED 20 PEOPLE AT A HOTEL
IN MALI'S CAPITAL.
AN ISLAMIST INSURGENCY PROMPTED
FRENCH FORCES TO INTERVENE IN
THE COUNTRY IN 2013; THAT SAME
YEAR, THE UNITED NATIONS
ESTABLISHED A PEACEKEEPING
MISSION THERE.
POPE FRANCIS IS IN UGANDA ON THE
SECOND LEG OF HIS AFRICAN TOUR.
TODAY, THE POPE DELIVERED MASS
BEFORE TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE AT A SHRINE FOR CHRISTIAN
MARTYRS IN UGANDA.
THE NATION IS A FORMER BRITISH
COLONY WHERE 40% OF THE
POPULATION IS CATHOLIC.
ENCOURAGING THE FAITHFUL TO
HONOR THE 19th CENTURY CATHOLICS
AND ANGLICANS PERSECUTED FOR
THEIR FAITH, THE POPE URGED
FOLLOWERS TO TAKE CARE OF "THE
ELDERLY, THE POOR, THE WIDOWED
AND THE ABANDONED."
POPE FRANCIS HEADS TO THE
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
TOMORROW.
>> Sreenivasan: RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADMIR PUTIN IS
ORDERING SANCTIONS AGAINST
TURKEY IN RETALIATION FOR TURKEY
SHOOTING DOWN A RUSSIAN WARPLANE
ON TUESDAY.
TURKEY CONTENDED THE SYRIA-BOUND
RUSSIAN PLANE HAD ENTERED
TURKEY'S AIRSPACE WITHOUT
PERMISSION.
THE ACT ALREADY PROMPTED RUSSIA
TO DEPLOY SURFACE-TO-AIR
MISSILES INSIDE SYRIA TO PROTECT
ITS AIRCRAFT CARRYING OUT AIR
STRIKES IN SYRIA.
NOW RUSSIA WILL RESTRICT THE
IMPORT OF CERTAIN TURKISH GOODS
AND PROHIBIT TRAVEL AGENCIES
FROM SELLING TOURS TO TURKEY.
EARLIER TODAY, TURKISH PRESIDENT
RECEP ERDOGAN EXPRESSED REGRET
FOR SHOOTING DOWN THE RUSSIAN
PLANE.
>> (translated): WE ARE REALLY
SADDENED BY THIS INCIDENT.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE WISHED THIS TO
HAPPEN, BUT UNFORTUNATELY IT
DID.
I HOPE THIS WILL NOT HAPPEN
AGAIN.
TURKEY HAS NEVER BEEN IN FAVOR
OF TRIGGERING TENSIONS AND
CLASHES, AND WE NEVER WILL BE.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
TO DISCUSS RUSSIA'S ECONOMIC
RESPONSE IS KIMBERLY MARTEN, A
PROFESSOR AT BARNARD COLLEGE,
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY HERE IN NEW
YORK.
WHY THIS BACK AND FORTH?
WHY THIS ESCALATION ON THE PART
OF RUSSIA AND REALLY
ATTEMPTED DE-ESCALATION ON
THE PART OF TURKEY?
>> WELL, TURKEY ISN'T
DE-ESCALATING AS MUCH AS THEY
COULD.
THEY DID NOT FOLLOW STANDARD
PRACTICE IN SHOOTING DOWN THE
RUSSIAN PLANE.
THEY MIGHT HAVE GIVEN SOME
VERBAL WARNING BUT THEY COULD
HAVE ESCORTED THE PLANE TO GET
IT OFF OF TURKISH TERRITORY.
THEY COULD HAVE FIRED WARNING
SHOTS.
SO, TURKEY IS NOT THE VICTIM
HERE.
AND I THINK THAT IT'S NOT
SURPRISING THAT RUSSIA IS
VERY ANGRY ABOUT WHAT'S
HAPPENING.
BUT PUTIN IS SORT OF FOLLOWING
HIS NORMAL PATTERN OF BEING MORE
ANGRY THAN HE NEEDS TO BE AND OF
TAKING MORE EXTREME ACTION THAN
HE NEEDS TO TAKE IN RESPONSE.
>> Sreenivasan: MOST IN THE
U.S. DON'T REALIZE HOW CLOSE AND
HOW CONNECTED RUSSIA AND TURKEY
ARE.
AS I WAS READING THIS, THIS IS
ONE OF THE BIGGEST DESTINATIONS
FOR RUSSIANS TO GET OUT OF
COUNTRY.
>> YES, HUGE TOURIST
DESTINATION, A LOT OF TRADE.
BUT IT'S SURPRISING THAT PUTIN'S
REACTION IS WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
ALL THESE VERY STRONG ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS PUT INTO PLACE AGAINST
TURKEY.
YOU WONDER WHO IS LEFT TO BE
TRADING WITH RUSSIA?
RUSSIA HAS PUT SANCTIONS AGAINST
THE EUROPEAN UNION.
NOW THEY HAVE SANCTIONS AGAINST
TURKEY.
WHERE ARE THEIR FRIENDS,
EXACTLY?
IT SEEMS THEIR ONLY FRIENDS AT
THIS POINT ARE SYRIA AND IRAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS COULD
HAVE A RIPPLE EFFECT ON THE
RUSSIAN ECONOMY, WHICH ISN'T
DOING TOO GREAT.
>> THE FORMER PRIME MINISTER OF
RUSSIA MADE THAT POINT PUBLICLY,
SAYING THIS IS NOT GOING TO BE
GOOD FOR THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY.
IT IS GOING TO HURT THE RUSSIAN
ECONOMY AS BADLY AS THE TURKISH
ECONOMY.
THE RUSSIAN ECONOMY WAS ALREADY
IN RECESSION PRIMARILY BECAUSE
OF LOW OIL PRICES.
IT JUST SEEMS LIKE PUTIN
EXPRESSES ANGER IN WAYS THAT
ACTUALLY SHOOT RUSSIA IN THE
FOOT.
>> Sreenivasan: TURKEY HAS A
LOT TO LOSE IN THIS.
THEY NEED ALL OF THE ENERGY THEY
GET FROM RUSSIA.
>> THEY DO.
THEY HAVE A HUGE AMOUNT OF
NATURAL GAS THAT THEY ARE
IMPORTING FROM RUSSIA.
THERE WAS SUPPOSED TO BE A NEW
PIPELINE THAT WAS GOING TO GO
INTO EFFECT TO ALLOW RUSSIA TO
BYPASS UKRAINE IN ITS GAS
EXPORTS TO EUROPE THAT NOW SEEMS
LIKE IT'S ON THE ROCKS,
ALTHOUGH PEOPLE REALIZE THAT
WASN'T VERY PROFITABLE ANYWAY.
SO, THAT MAY HAVE BEEN AN EXCUSE
TO GET AROUND IT.
IT ALSO SEEMS LIKE THEY MIGHT
LOSE GRAIN IMPORTS FROM
RUSSIA, AND UKRAINE IS
STEPPING IN SAYING, "TURKEY, IF
YOU NEED GRAIN, WE'RE HERE.
WE'LL HELP YOU."
IT COULD CEMENT FURTHER TRADE
RELATION BETWEEN UKRAINE AND
TURKEY, AND TURKEY AND ITS
EUROPEAN PARTNERS.
WHAT PUTIN SEEMS TO BE DOING
OVER AND OVER AGAIN IS JUST
DRIVING MORE AND MORE OPPONENTS
TO HAVE COMMON INTERESTS AGAINST
WHAT HE'S DOING.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE ABOUT THE RUSSIANS SEEM
TO BE TARGETING TURKISH
ANTI-ASSAD FORCES.
AND REALLY, IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF DAYS AFTER THE DOWNING OF
THIS JET, THEY SEEM TO INTENSIFY
THOSE ATTACKS.
>> AND IN A SENSE, THAT'S NOT
COMPLETELY NEW BECAUSE WE KNOW
FOR THE LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS
THAT RUSSIA HAS BEEN ON THE
GROUND IN SYRIA.
THEY HAVE NOT PRIMARILY BEEN
GOING AFTER ISLAMIC STATE
TARGETS.
SO, THESE PEOPLE THAT ARE BEING
HIT NOW WERE PEOPLE BEING HIT
EARLIER, TOO.
BUT, YES, THAT'S PART OF THE
RETALIATION.
RATHER THAN WHAT YOU-- YOU KNOW,
WHAT WOULD BE THE SENSIBLE THINK
OF THE RUSSIAN PLANE SHOULD
AVOID THE TURKISH BORDER AND
WE'LL TRY TO BALK A LITTLE BIT.
IT SEEMS PUTIN IS SAYING SEND
THE PLANES RIGHT INTO THE
TURKISH BORDER AREA AND HIT
AGAINST THE TURKMEN GROUPS THAT
TURKEY IS COOPERATING WITH THE
MOST IN SYRIA.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
U.S. ROLE IN ALL OF THIS?
WE NEED TURKEY RIGHT NOW.
THEIR AIRBASE HELPS US GET OFF
THE GROUND TOWARDS BOMBING RUNS
MUCH EASIER.
BUT HOW DO WE HELP NEGOTIATE
THIS FIGHT?
>> IT'S VERY COMPLICATED BECAUSE
THE U.S. IS ALSO GIVING SUPPORT
TO KURDISH REBELS IN SYRIA, AND
TURKEY IS HAVING PROBLEMS WITH
ITS OWN KURDISH POPULATIONS AND
TRYING TO RESTRICT ITS OWN
KURDISH POPULATION.
SO, THE U.S. AND TURKISH
INTERESTS ARE NOT COMPLETELY
ALIGNED, EITHER, SO THE ENTIRE
SITUATION IS EXTRAORDINARILY
COMPLEX.
IT DOESN'T BREAK DOWN EASILY
INTO ONE SET OF ALLIANCES.
>> Sreenivasan: KIMBERLY
MARTEN OF BARNARD COLLEGE AND
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THE UNITED
NATIONS REPORTED YESTERDAY THAT
AIDS IS NOW THE SECOND LEADING
CAUSE OF DEATH FOR ADOLESCENTS
AROUND THE WORLD, AND THE NUMBER
OF 10-TO-19-YEAR-OLDS DYING FROM
AIDS HAS TRIPLED SINCE THE YEAR
2000.
IN THE UNITED STATES, ABOUT
50,000 PEOPLE EVERY YEAR ARE
INFECTED WITH H.I.V., THE
VIRUS THAT CAUSES AIDS.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, PUBLIC HEALTH
OFFICIALS AND DOCTORS ARE
PUSHING A PLAN TO LOWER NEW
INFECTIONS IN THEIR CITY TO
ZERO WITH WIDER USE OF THE DRUG
TRUVADA, WHICH HAS BEEN SHOWN
TO REDUCE INFECTION RATES.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FREY REPORTS ON THE
CHALLENGES OF "PLAN ZERO" IN
THIS UPDATED SIGNATURE SEGMENT
WE FIRST BROADCAST IN APRIL.
>> Reporter: AT WARD 86, A
BUSTLING OUTPATIENT H.I.V.
CLINIC AT SAN FRANCISCO GENERAL
HOSPITAL, NURSE DIANE JONES
DROPS EVERYTHING WHEN THIS PAGER
GOES OFF.
IT MEANS THAT SOMEONE IN THE
CITY JUST TESTED H.I.V.-
POSITIVE.
>> SO, I'M GOING TO MAKE HIM AN
APPOINTMENT.
>> Reporter: JONES IS FOLLOWING
A PROTOCOL CALLED "RAPID," WHICH
IS DESIGNED TO GET NEW H.I.V.-
POSITIVE INDIVIDUALS INTO
TREATMENT IMMEDIATELY.
>> JUST GOT DIAGNOSED TODAY,
LAST NEGATIVE WAS JUNE.
>> Reporter: JONES SCRAMBLES TO
MAKE PLANS FOR THE NEW PATIENT,
WHO IS SEEN JUST HOURS LATER.
IT'S PART OF AN AMBITIOUS PLAN
IN SAN FRANCISCO TO COMPLETELY
END NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS.
EACH YEAR, AN ESTIMATED 50,000
PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES ARE
INFECTED WITH H.I.V. IN THE
U.S.
AND WHILE THE DISEASE HAS MOVED
OFF THE FRONT PAGES AS TREATMENT
HAS MADE INFECTION MORE OF A
MANAGEABLE CHRONIC CONDITION, AN
ESTIMATED 13,700 PEOPLE STILL
DIE FROM AIDS IN THE U.S. EACH
YEAR.
GLOBALLY, AN ESTIMATED 1.5
MILLION PEOPLE ARE KILLED.
IT'S THE 6th LEADING CAUSE OF
DEATH.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, THERE ARE
RELATIVELY FEW NEW H.I.V.
INFECTIONS-- 302 IN 2014, THE
LATEST YEAR STATISTICS ARE
AVAILABLE, AND IT OVERWHELMINGLY
AFFLICTS GAY MEN.
THE NUMBER OF NEW H.I.V.
INFECTIONS HAS BEEN FALLING FOR
EIGHT YEARS.
TODAY, PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIALS,
DOCTORS AND ACTIVISTS ARE
INCREASING THEIR EFFORTS TO
BRING THAT NUMBER ALL THE WAY
DOWN TO ZERO.
>> WE ARE TALKING ABOUT ENDING
THE H.I.V. EPIDEMIC.
>> Reporter: DR. DIANE HAVLIR IS
CHIEF OF THE H.I.V./AIDS
DIVISION AT SAN FRANCISCO
GENERAL HOSPITAL AND A FOUNDER
OF THE CITY'S "GETTING TO ZERO"
CONSORTIUM.
>> H.I.V. IS ONE OF THE WORST
EPIDEMICS OF ITS TIME.
IT'S TAKEN A HUGE TOLL ON OUR
CITY, A HUGE TOLL ALL AROUND THE
WORLD.
WE KNOW HOW TO PREVENT THIS
DISEASE, WE KNOW HOW TO TREAT
THIS DISEASE.
SO, WHY WOULD WE NOT WANT TO
PREVENT EVERY SINGLE INFECTION
AND PREVENT EVERY SINGLE DEATH?
>> Reporter: IN SAN FRANCISCO,
WHICH HAS SPENT $400 MILLION
FIGHTING H.I.V. OVER THE
LAST DECADE, THIS PLAN CALLS FOR
CONTROVERSIAL NEW DRUGS AS WELL
AS ESTABLISHED PREVENTION
STRATEGIES.
BUT IT STARTS WITH IMMEDIATE
TREATMENT FOR NEW H.I.V.
INFECTIONS.
>> IT DID, OKAY.
>> Reporter: ONE OF DR. HAVLIR'S
PATIENTS, JOSE, WHO IS OPENLY
GAY BUT ASKED THAT WE CONCEAL
HIS IDENTITY BECAUSE HIS
FAMILY DOESN'T KNOW ABOUT HIS
HEALTH ISSUE, WENT THROUGH THE
"RAPID" PROTOCOL WHEN HE WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH H.I.V. ALMOST A
YEAR AGO.
>> SAY "AHHHH."
>> Reporter: WITHIN 24 HOURS OF
BEING DIAGNOSED, JOSE WAS HERE
AT WARD 86, AND DAYS LATER
RECEIVING H.I.V. MEDICATION.
>> I WAS ON MEDICATION ON THE
THIRD DAY, AND UNDETECTABLE
WITHIN LESS THAN 30 DAYS.
>> Reporter: UNDETECTABLE,
MEANING HIS H.I.V. VIRAL LOAD
HAD BEEN REDUCED BY MEDICATION
TO THE POINT WHERE IT COULDN'T
BE DETECTED.
AND THE FASTER A NEW PATIENT IS
UNDETECTABLE, THE FASTER HE
REDUCES HIS CHANCE OF
TRANSMITTING THE VIRUS TO
OTHERS.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, ABOUT
TWO-THIRDS OF H.I.V.-POSITIVE
INDIVIDUALS ARE VIRALLY-
SUPPRESSED, LIKE JOSE-- MORE
THAN DOUBLE THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE.
BUT THAT REQUIRES AN ENORMOUS
EFFORT.
>> THEY MIGHT END UP IN THE
HOSPITAL, THAT'S WHEN WE'RE
GOING TO MEET THEM AGAIN.
>> Reporter: WE FOLLOWED SOCIAL
WORKER SANDRA TORRES ON THE BUS
AS SHE CHECKED UP ON A FEW
PATIENTS WHO NEEDED EXTRA HELP
KEEPING UP WITH THEIR
APPOINTMENTS.
SHE AND OTHER SOCIAL WORKERS ARE
CONTINUALLY TRACKING PEOPLE
DOWN.
>> WE'RE GOING TO KNOCK ON THE
DOOR.
>> Reporter: IN THE GRITTY
TENDERLOIN DISTRICT, WE WENT TO
A SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY HOTEL
WHERE AN H.I.V.-POSITIVE PATIENT
WAS STAYING.
HE'S AN INTRAVENOUS DRUG USER
AND NOT TAKING MEDICATION.
>> HI, HONEY, HOW YOU DOING?
>> Reporter: TORRES DROPPED OFF
AN APPOINTMENT REMINDER, AND I
ASKED HER ABOUT THE PATIENT
AFTERWARD.
IT SEEMS LIKE AN ENORMOUS EFFORT
FOR ONE PERSON.
>> THAT'S WHAT IT'S GONNA TAKE,
THOUGH.
THAT IS ABSOLUTELY WHAT IT'S
GONNA TAKE.
>> Reporter: BUT IN SAN
FRANCISCO, "GETTING TO ZERO" IS
ALSO BANKING ON THE EXPANDED USE
OF A NEW TOOL, A DRUG THAT
PROTECTS INDIVIDUALS FROM
BECOMING INFECTED WITH H.I.V.
IT'S CALLED TRUVADA.
>> IF YOU TAKE THE PILL ONCE A
DAY, AND YOU TAKE IT
CONSISTENTLY, YOU WILL REDUCE
YOUR RISK OF H.I.V. INFECTION
BY AT LEAST 90%, AND PERHAPS
AS HIGH AS 99%.
>> Reporter: SCOTT WIENER IS AN
ELECTED CITY SUPERVISOR AND A
MEMBER OF THE "GETTING TO ZERO"
CONSORTIUM.
>> IT JUST MAKES SENSE FOR
PEOPLE TO CONSIDER THIS
ADDITIONAL PREVENTION TOOL.
IT MADE SENSE FOR ME.
AND I'M GLAD THAT I'M ON IT.
>> Reporter: WIENER, WHO
REPRESENTS THE LARGELY GAY
CASTRO DISTRICT AND WHO IS GAY
HIMSELF, WENT PUBLIC ABOUT HIS
OWN USE OF THE DRUG REGIMEN LAST
FALL AND MAKES TAKING THE ONCE-
A-DAY-PILL PART OF HIS ROUTINE
EACH MORNING.
>> MY DECISION TO DISCLOSE IS
REALLY TO RAISE AWARENESS SO
MORE PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT IT AND
LOOK INTO IT, TO TRY TO INCREASE
ACCESS AND PROVIDE MOMENTUM FOR
BETTER ACCESS AND TO TRY TO
REDUCE STIGMA.
SO, WHATEVER STEREOTYPES PEOPLE
HAVE, MAYBE WE CAN HELP BREAK
THOSE STEREOTYPES.
>> Reporter: INCLUDING THE
STEREOTYPES RAISED BY SOME
CRITICS THAT TAKING A PILL THAT
PREVENTS H.I.V. INFECTION WOULD
LEAD TO MORE PROMISCUOUS
BEHAVIOR.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
A DRUG THAT IN SOME CIRCLES HAS
A STIGMA OF OPENING THE DOOR TO
A FREE-WHEELING SEX SOCIETY.
H.I.V.'S NO LONGER A THREAT AND
WE DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
UNPROTECTED SEX.
DO YOU GET ANY OF THAT BACKLASH?
>> THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE WHO
HAVE THAT VIEW.
AND IT'S REALLY THE SAME
ARGUMENT AS WHEN PEOPLE WOULD
ARGUE IF YOU GIVE WOMEN ACCESS
TO THE BIRTH CONTROL PILL,
YOU'RE JUST GONNA ENCOURAGE THEM
TO BE PROMISCUOUS.
OR IF YOU VACCINATE YOUNG GIRLS
AGAINST H.P.V. YOU'RE GONNA TURN
THEM INTO, I THINK ONE PERSON
SAID, "YOU'LL TURN THEM INTO
NYMPHOMANIACS."
OR IF YOU GIVE SEX-ED TO
HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS OR
MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS, YOU'RE
GONNA ENCOURAGE THEM TO BE
PROMISCUOUS.
THESE ARE COMPLETELY SPECIOUS
ARGUMENTS.
THIS IS ABOUT GIVING PEOPLE
EVERY TOOL AVAILABLE TO PROTECT
THEIR SEXUAL HEALTH.
>> Reporter: THE FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION APPROVED THE DRUG
TRUVADA FOR H.I.V. PREVENTION
THREE YEARS AGO.
AND LAST YEAR THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL ISSUED
GUIDELINES RECOMMENDING THE DRUG
FOR ANYONE WITH A SUBSTANTIAL
RISK OF H.I.V. INFECTION.
IN SAN FRANCISCO, RESEARCHERS
BELIEVE THAT WIDER ADOPTION OF
TRUVADA COULD DRAMATICALLY
REDUCE NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS.
IN A STUDY PUBLISHED IN
SEPTEMBER, SAN FRANCISCO'S
LARGEST PRIVATE HEALTH INSURER,
KAISER PERMANENTE, FOUND THAT
NOT ONE OF ITS 657 CLIENTS
TAKING TRUVADA HAD BECOME
INFECTED WITH H.I.V. DURING AN
OBSERVATION PERIOD OF MORE THAN
TWO YEARS.
ANOTHER STUDY PUBLISHED THIS
MONTH IN THE "JOURNAL OF THE
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION"
SHOWED SIMILAR RESULTS; OUT OF
437 INDIVIDUALS TAKING TRUVADA
FOR A YEAR, ONLY TWO CONTRACTED
H.I.V. AFTER NOT PROPERLY TAKING
THE DRUG.
BUT SO FAR, ONLY A FEW THOUSAND
SAN FRANCISCANS HAVE TAKEN
TRUVADA IN THE LAST YEAR.
SO, WHY ISN'T THE USE OF THIS
DRUG MORE WIDESPREAD?
THERE ARE SOME SIDE EFFECTS AS
WELL AS SPECULATION THAT DOCTORS
MAY BE HESITANT TO PRESCRIBE A
PREVENTATIVE DRUG TO HEALTHY
PATIENTS, AND THEN THERE'S THE
PRICE.
ALTHOUGH COVERED BY MOST
INSURANCE, TRUVADA, IS LISTED AT
MORE THAN $1000 A MONTH.
EVEN SO, IT'S NOT NEARLY THE
SOLUTION THAT ITS PROPONENTS
MAKE IT OUT TO BE, ACCORDING TO
MICHAEL WEINSTEIN, PRESIDENT OF
THE AIDS HEALTHCARE FOUNDATION,
ONE OF THE LARGEST AIDS
ORGANIZATIONS IN THE WORLD.
>> THE EVIDENCE SHOWS
THAT IT IS NOT A GOOD PUBLIC
HEALTH STRATEGY.
>> Reporter: WHY IS THAT?
>> WELL, BECAUSE PEOPLE DON'T
ADHERE.
>> Reporter: WHILE STUDIES HAVE
SHOWN THAT THE REGIMEN CAN BE
OVER 90% EFFECTIVE WHEN TAKEN
EVERY DAY, WEINSTEIN POINTS OUT
THAT THE EFFICACY DROPS OFF WHEN
PEOPLE MISS THEIR DAILY DOSE.
HE ALSO SAYS THAT RELYING ON A
PILL INSTEAD OF A CONDOM MAY
LEAD TO A RISE IN OTHER SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED DISEASES.
>> THE MOTIVATION THAT PEOPLE
HAVE FOR TAKING TRUVADA IS TO BE
ABLE TO HAVE SEX WITHOUT A
CONDOM.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
PEOPLE DON'T WANT TO WEAR
CONDOMS, EITHER?
>> I THINK MEN IN GENERAL DON'T
WANNA WEAR CONDOMS.
THAT'S JUST AN ABSOLUTE TRUTH.
I MEAN, AND IT'S NOT SURPRISING.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WE DON'T WEAR
SEATBELTS EITHER, YOU KNOW, OR
HELMETS OR A LOT OF OTHER
THINGS.
BUT THEY'RE A NECESSITY.
>> Reporter: SO, WOULDN'T IT BE
BETTER THEN TO JUST TAKE A PILL
EVERY DAY INSTEAD OF WORRYING
ABOUT TRANSMITTING H.I.V.?
>> YOU KNOW WHAT?
IF IT WAS GUARANTEED THAT
EVERYBODY WOULD TAKE IT EVERY
DAY AS PRESCRIBED, OBVIOUSLY
OUR ATTITUDE ABOUT IT WOULD BE
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT IF WE
DIDN'T HAVE TO RELY ON THE
PERSON TO TAKE THAT PILL EVERY
SINGLE DAY.
>> Reporter: WHILE KAISER
PERMANENTE'S RECENT STUDY OF
TRUVADA USERS FOUND THAT NONE
HAD CONTRACTED H.I.V., IT ALSO
SHOWED THAT 41% OF PARTICIPANTS
REPORTED A DECREASE IN CONDOM
USE; AND AFTER ONE YEAR OF
TRUVADA USE, 50% WERE DIAGNOSED
WITH ANOTHER S.T.D.
>> Reporter: SAN FRANCISCO
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
CHIEF BARBARA GARCIA SAYS THE
CITY IS WORKING TO MAKE SURE THE
DRUG IS TAKEN AS PRESCRIBED AND
THAT IT DOESN'T LEAD TO OTHER
SAFE SEX PRACTICES BEING
ABANDONED.
>> WE HAVE ALREADY STARTED IN
TRYING TO EDUCATE YOUNG PEOPLE,
PARTICULARLY ABOUT THIS.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE CHALLENGES
OF HAVING... EVEN IF WE HAD A
CURE, THAT WOULD BE THE SAME
CHALLENGE WE WOULD HAVE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU SEE THAT
HAPPENING, THOUGH?
I MEAN, OBVIOUSLY, IF YOU'RE
HAVING UNSAFE SEX, YOU'RE GOING
TO BE TRANSMITTING OTHER
SEXUALLY-TRANSMITTED DISEASES
HERE.
>> AND, IN FACT, WE'VE SEEN A
LITTLE BIT OF A RISE IN S.T.D.
HERE IN SAN FRANCISCO,
AND WE'RE ADDRESSING THAT, AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT
AN INCREASE IN S.T.D.s IS
RELATED TO AN INCREASE IN THE
USE OF TRUVADA.
AND GARCIA IS COMMITTED TO THE
DRUG REGIMEN BEING A PART OF
"GETTING TO ZERO" IN SAN
FRANCISCO, AND BELIEVES THAT THE
CITY'S APPROACH TO ENDING
H.I.V., INCLUDING THE LIVES AND
MONEY IT WILL SAVE, WILL
EVENTUALLY TRUMP ANY
CONTROVERSY.
YOU CAN PROVE TO THEM THAT YOU
CAN SAVE MONEY BY YOUR MODEL?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AN H.I.V. PREVENTION VERSUS AN
H.I.V. POSITIVE CLIENT IN CARE,
YES, WE CAN.
>> Reporter: SAN FRANCISCO HAS
MADE TREMENDOUS ADVANCES IN
BATTLING AN EPIDEMIC THAT HIS
THIS CITY HARDER THAN MOST.
AND ACCORDING TO DR. DIANE
HAVLIR, ACTUALLY GETTING TO ZERO
IS WITHIN REACH.
>> I THINK WE WOULD ALL
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IT IS GOING TO
BE DIFFICULT TO DO, BUT I THINK
IF, AS WE SAY, IF ANYBODY CAN DO
IT, WE THINK THAT WE CAN SHOW
PEOPLE HOW IT CAN BE DONE
STARTING HERE.
>> Reporter: SAN FRANCISCO'S
MAYOR ED LEE ANNOUNCED LAST
MONTH THAT HE IS ALLOCATING $1.2
MILLION A YEAR FOR "GETTING TO
ZERO."
THE FUNDING WILL INCREASE RAPID
TESTING PROGRAMS, EXPAND THE USE
OF TRUVADA AND ENLARGE THE
NUMBER OF H.I.V.-POSITIVE
PATIENTS WHO RECEIVE CARE.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
TRUVADA, THE DRUG THAT'S A MAJOR
PART OF SAN FRANCISCO'S PLAN TO
REDUCE NEW H.I.V. INFECTIONS TO
ZERO.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
RETURNING TO OUR LEAD STORY,
COLORADO SPRINGS RESIDENTS
GATHERED IN A CHURCH THIS
AFTERNOON FOR A VIGIL TO HONOR
VICTIMS OF YESTERDAY'S SHOOTING
AT A PLANNED PARENTHOOD CLINIC.
ANOTHER GATHERING TONIGHT WILL
HONOR THE UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO
POLICE OFFICER KILLED.
JAPAN PLANS TO RESUME HUNTING
FOR WHALES IN THE OCEAN WATERS
AROUND ANTARCTICA EARLY NEXT
YEAR.
BUT JAPAN WILL REDUCE ITS ANNUAL
CATCH BY TWO-THIRDS, FROM A
THOUSAND WHALES TO 333.
AN INTERNATIONAL COURT ORDERED
JAPAN LAST YEAR TO STOP WHALE
HUNTING.
JAPAN HAD BEEN HUNTING WHALES
UNDER AN EXEMPTION THAT ALLOWS
THE ANIMALS TO BE KILLED FOR
RESEARCH.
AND FINALLY, STARTING AT
MIDNIGHT TONIGHT, FAR FEWER
AMERICANS WILL HAVE THEIR PHONE
RECORDS MONITORED BY THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY.
THE N.S.A. SAYS IT IS SCALING
BACK ITS BULK COLLECTION OF SO-
CALLED METADATA THAT DETAILS
WHAT NUMBERS YOU ARE CALLING AND
WHEN.
THE ONCE-SECRET PHONE
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM BEGAN AFTER
THE SEPTEMBER 11th ATTACKS UNDER
THE PATRIOT ACT, BUT CONGRESS
HAS CHANGED THE LAW AFTER
REVELATIONS BY FORMER N.S.A.
CONTRACTOR EDWARD SNOWDEN AND
PROTESTS BY TELECOM COMPANIES.
THE N.S.A. MUST NOW OBTAIN A
COURT ORDER TO MONITOR CALL
RECORDS OF ANY INDIVIDUAL OR
GROUP, AND REPORT PUBLICLY HOW
MANY SUCH ORDERS ARE GRANTED.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.